This week on Bold Names, we're talking
to David Cordani. He's the chairman and
CEO of Sigma, one of the US's biggest
health insurers. Now joining me to talk
to David is another David, my colleague
David Waner, who is a healthcare
columnist for the Wall Street Journal.
Really excited to talk about our
fastchanging health system.
>> That's next.
David, thank you for joining us on Bold
Names. I'm really interested in one of
those areas that I know you're
passionate about, which is mental health
care. How did this become top of mind
for you? So, a a couple points. When you
enter the healthcare conversation, the
modern view of life is that the physical
health and mental health aspect of a
human being are inextricably linked. For
all too long, our society separated
those of you have a physical ailment, go
see a medical doctor. You have a mental
ailment, go see a mental health
professional. But physical health and
mental health are inextricably linked.
So guided by our mission, we lean into
that pretty meaningfully. And when you
step back, you could look at our
society, the US alone, whether we want
to talk about the global society, and
recognize that early onset of mental
health challenges, be they anxiety,
stress, or early stage depression, have
a significant impact on an individual's
health, well-being, if they're employed,
their sense of belonging, productivity,
and overall engagement. For those who
are watching, those of you listening who
don't know what Sigma is, a big part of
your business, Sigma Healthcare is the
insurance arm, which provides medical,
dental, and vision benefits uh through
employers uh to their employees. This is
a way that a lot of people access the
the health care system in the US. It's
one of the largest in the US, and that
puts you in a position, I think, a
unique position. you're hearing from the
CEOs of big companies and my
understanding is that they've come to
you with concerns about the the mental
health of their employees. What what
have you been hearing and when did you
start hearing it? So, increasingly and
amplified through the pandemic more and
more employers at the CO level realized
they had a significant mental health and
mental well-being challenge and they
were looking and exploring and open to
alternative ways to help to address
that. So beyond dealing with sickness
when it transpires, how do you have
programs to have early identification
of, as I mentioned before, anxiety or
elevated stress levels, which are
gateways to depression, which are
gateways to more elevated mental health
and physical health challenges. So when
you think about it, there's a couple
different dimensions that exist. First,
over a long period of time, less so
today, there was a stigma to having the
mental health topic attached to an
individual. Second is just pragmatic
access. In many cases, mental health
professionals, therapists, starting from
that dimension are smaller operations.
Um, and there may not be the physical
proximity or ease of access to those
mental health professionals. So,
dstigmatizing
awareness and easing access. How do you
ease access? making sure there's a
physical network or the ability to
access a a mental health professional.
Secondly, a virtual network because
virtual works quite well for many
aspects of mental health or mental
health therapies. In fact, some people
prefer that because it's a level of
anonymity. So, stigma, awareness,
physical access, virtual access all have
to come to bear.
>> As Tim mentioned, uh Sigma is focused on
employer plans. Why prioritize this
segment?
>> Few reasons. One, first, it's important
to recognize that the US employer market
is the backbone of the US healthcare
ecosystem. Point two is that each
employer presents an example to form a
micro community and we have the ability
to work employer by employer to
understand their culture, their
strategy, the respective health burden
of their population and we've proven
time and time again that yields a more
positive result. And lastly, we have
been an outlier in that we've been
committed to what are the more
transparent programs like self-funded.
So there's total transparency between
ourselves and the employer to where and
how their dollars are being spent and
what the impact of those dollars are
which allow us to change or modify or
tweak the programs throughout the course
of the year as opposed to wait till the
end of the year and evaluate it.
>> Tell me what has worked for Sigma when
it comes to promoting me mental health.
Can you give an example of a program
that's worked?
>> Sure. And I I'll just add a few building
blocks. Um, now you put it under an
umbrella of awareness and open dialogue.
So, back to that mission of improving
health and vitality, we talk in our
organization around that broader set of
needs. um access to therapists, access
to counselors, access to virtual
resources, and importantly, the ad I
would give to it is a significant amount
of energy around community activation
and belonging. It's proven that having
individuals have access to micro
communities within their um place of
employment and then activating in their
community through volunteerism creates a
net positive mental health and overall
productivity. Not only are you dealing
with CEOs as the CEO of Sigma, but
you're also on the business round table
and I know that part of your effort
there is working on mental health um for
that group which is uh really kind of
the mouthpiece for big business in
Washington DC working on issues that are
very important to CEOs whether they're
political or social. It's an area where
I'm quite proud. I'm quite proud of the
business community leaning in versus
observing. So the business round table
that is approximately 250 CEOs uh
identif
>> and these are the biggest of big
companies right you got Mary B from
General Motors Tim Cook from Apple I
mean these are the boldest of bold names
uh as yourself among yourself
>> and a cross-section of every industry
represented there um confronted with the
information identified this as an
important initiative and undertaken I
have the good fortune of being the chair
of that initiative so what has that done
it's created more awareness it's created
more information sharing. It's created
more training. We've even had um mental
health first aid training that has been
delivered to many corporations. So net
positive in terms of seeing that body of
leaders lean into this. Whether you lean
into it in terms of making your business
more vibrant or lean into it to make
your community more vibrant, they
intersect at the same level of actions
and we're seeing good momentum there.
>> Yeah. I want to talk about cost. You
were just in DC testifying before
Congress earlier this year about why
healthcare has become so expensive in
the US and a stat really stuck out to me
that the average family health insurance
plan now costs more than $26,000 a year
and that I guess leads to the question
in my mind why have costs gotten so
expensive.
First, there's clearly an affordability
challenge across the United States. If
we want to understand the core aspects
to why you could break it into two
fundamental categories which doesn't
excuse it but you need to understand the
fundamental categories so we could
address it. First on the demand side we
are demanding and consuming more
services that is in part driven by the
aging of the population that's a global
phenomenon but also a US phenomenon and
consumption grows as age grows on
average. Second, in excess of 50% of
Americans are dealing with chronic
health situations. We've had an
explosion in chronic care issues in
America. So that's on the demand side.
On the supply side, new pharmaceuticals,
while in some cases life- saving, life
sustaining or life improving are at a
higher and higher cost every year.
>> Can you pinpoint the moment when this
started to to be the case? When the
system began to crack, if you will? Um I
I can't pinpoint the moment with
precision, but if you go back um into
the 70s time frame, the rate of medical
cost growth, more so approximated
inflation growth. So a little bit
greater but more approximated inflation
growth. As you come forth to the last 25
years, the rate of medical cost growth,
and I mean medical costs in the broader,
medical, pharmacy, behavioral cost
growth is running at about 3x the rate
of inflation, three times the rate of
inflation for last couple decades and a
half. So we could look at the last 25
years where that multiplier effect has
transpired and there's two constants
that are indisputable in there. the
global health profile relative to
chronic conditions has eroded and the US
leads unfortunately in some of those
categories. There's higher medical cost
consumption that are attached to that.
And secondly, the higher cost
interventions have grown in the last
decade or two even more rapidly. Those
are the two triggers um that are driving
the acceleration. I'm just curious, you
know, as you look at this, what kind of
role or responsibility insurance
insurance companies have in bringing
down these costs?
>> So, the question comes down to how do
you bring down the cost or how do you
slow the rate of growth? And I think
there's four major ways you do so. One,
you invest time, effort, and energy to
help to keep the healthy healthy in the
first place. The US spends the vast
majority of its resources fixing
sickness after it occurs.
We need to spend more resources on
helping individuals maintain their
health.
>> We're really good at uh sick care
intervention at the end, right? We're
not good at maybe on the front end of of
of taking care of health, right?
>> 100% 100%. Second, the category least
spoken about is um any group of
individuals. You could take the country
as a whole. We could take a state. You
could take a city. You could take an
employer. Has a percentage of the
population that appears to be healthy
because they have low medical cost
claims or very little, but they have
high health risks because of lifestyle,
behavior, or genetic predisposition.
Good health service programs could help
to identify those risks before they
blossom in a chronic event or into an
acute event. You could see pre-diabetic.
You could see pre-coronary disease. You
could see a high-risisk maternity event
and intervene and help a mom go full
term which is in everybody's best
interest starting with the health of the
baby and the family unit and the
community. So advancing around the
healthy at risk in the case of the
chronic population the evidence-based
care needs to be followed. It's
something where the health service
companies like ourselves do a great job
and that is typically medication
compliance. If you're a diabetic, being
consistent on your medication is mission
critical. If you're on a coronary
clinical management program, medication
consistency is mission critical around
your um cholesterol-lowering
medications, etc., etc.
>> One of the things insurers get
criticized for is their use of prior
authorizations. Basically, that's the
requirement that doctors get approval
from the insurance company before
providing certain treatments. How do you
think about the way these prior
authorizations are currently working?
>> Yeah. So, prior authorizations are part
of how the system works today. I'm not
justifying it. It's just part of how the
system works today. Whether it's the
commercial employers or um the Medicare
system, we need to do a better job
creating a seamless experience for the
benefit of the patient. Full stop. We
made a commitment as an organization in
the first quarter of last year to do
just that. So, we can do better. We are
doing better and we need to do better.
>> Let's talk about the big question. How
do you fix the American healthcare
system? I know you've been studying it
for a long time. You talked to Congress
about it. What are your kind of broad
big ideas that need to be addressed?
>> Sure. So, so thank you. Um, an important
topic and one I think about tirelessly.
had the good fortune of working for the
sign group for 35 years and I've been in
in pursuit of the question you just
asked. There are three major things we
could do to dramatically improve our
healthcare system. One we talked about
but we don't talk about enough. Invest
more resources and energy upfront in
someone's health and life journey around
preventative care, whole person care and
long-term health. the most developed
countries around the world. Um, Congress
asked a question about Switzerland.
>> 12.2% of their GDP on health care with
is the life expectancy. Italy 8.4% life
expectancy in 84. OECD overall 9.3% life
expectancy in 81. Why have so many other
first world countries figured out how to
do this and we have not? We have a
shortage of primary care physicians,
OBGYNS, pediatricians, and
geriatricians. That's one. Two, given we
are $5 trillion of spending on health
care, the money needs to be spent based
upon clinical outcomes, not consumption.
We are a volumebased model. The more
volume that is delivered, the more
dollars are spent. The more innovation
exists around paying based on clinical
outcomes, especially in some of the more
complex healthcare situations. That's
where centers of excellence exist.
That's where chronic care optimization
programs exist. That's where getting uh
more alignment with pharmaceutical
manufacturers on some of the higher cost
medications. And third is to harness
competition more aggressively. The US
system works when we harness
competition. 90% of all pharmaceuticals
are generic. It's only 12% of the costs.
>> Congress was grilling you recently, but
how do you view the federal government's
role in healthcare? What do you as an
insurer need from Congress?
>> So, um, you use the word insurer. I I
kind of keep coming at this as health
service because the vast majority of
what we provide are services. Um, from a
congressional standpoint, the US
commercial market that you made
reference to before functions and
operates based upon choice. So ensuring
that choice continues to exist because
no employer is the same, no community is
the same, each marketplace has different
levels of clinical sophistication,
ensuring choice one, aggressively
pursuing more transparency for the
benefit of all, even if it's disruptive
to any business model, including my
industries, hospital, pharmaceutical.
Transparency is a clean elixir is
mission critical. And then thirdly, the
federal government is the largest single
payer of health care through Medicare
indirectly through Medicaid that it
largely subsidizes and then derivative
programs around that. The federal
government has the ability to ensure
that more of those dollars are spent
based on value, which will convert more
of the health care delivery system to an
outcomebased versus a consumptionbased.
Those three actions would be extremely
positive. Right now, there's this major
debate, right, about whether to extend
the enhanced benefits under the ACA, the
Affordable Care Act, uh, which supported
millions of Americans before they
expired in December. Right at the time
we're speaking, it's still unclear
what's going to happen with those
subsidies. But what changes would you
make to the market to make it work
better for everyone?
>> So, the market that you're talking about
is the exchange-based marketplace today.
There are approximately 20 to 25 million
Americans in the exchange marketplace.
Not unimportant just by way of scale and
scope. When the Affordable Care Act was
launched back in when it became
operational in 2014, the subsidy dollars
were largely pointed toward individuals
above 100% of federal poverty level. Um,
so where Medicaid dropped off, it picked
up to about 250% of federal poverty
level. And the program ultimately gained
very good traction there and had good
continuity there. There were some
subsidy dollars for people above 250% of
federal poverty level to 400, but then
it stopped and you had more choice and
individual um engagement there. During
COVID, the subsidy dollars went
meaningfully above the 400% of federal
poverty level. So, we need to step back
and decide who is the target audience
for this program. If it's individuals up
to 250% of federal poverty level,
there's an architecture that works quite
well that we need to strengthen. If you
want it to go to 400%, it needs to be
strengthened. If you want it to go to
700%, having a debate around temporary
subsidies is not helpful or effective.
It boomerangs the market. It's not fair
to the recipients or the patients that
are boomeranging around. and the players
in the space, both the hospital systems
and doctors and the insurance companies
can't operate with the rules changing
every year. We're seeing the negative
ramifications and unfortunately millions
of Americans are caught in that friction
right now and that's unacceptable.
>> It's been a little bit more than a year
that since the killing of United Health
executive,
>> the CEO of United Healthcare, Brian
Thompson, was fatally shot just outside
the Hilton Hotel in Midtown Manhattan.
police are [clears throat] searching for
the gunman. They believe the shooting
was a targeted killing
>> which really unleashed a wave of public
animosity around this topic of
healthcare
>> news. The alleged CEO killer Luigi Man
denied bail as many people are
sympathizing with him online tonight.
>> I'm curious how Sigma changed the way
it's operated since then.
>> You're referencing um December 4th of
2024. I think to be exact. Um very um
poignant.
>> You remember that day specifically? You
have to remember the
>> you have to because that that should
never happen to any American um let
alone someone in your a peer in your
industry. So to your core of your
question, what do we do? Um first things
first, you deal with the um physical
safety and psychological safety of your
colleagues and their family members
because um time changed at that moment.
No one should go through or endure that
violence of that level is not acceptable
under any circumstances period. So what
do we do after um leaning into the
physical and psychological safety? We
chose to listen even harder. We came
forward with a public voluntary set of
commitments known as our commitment to
better. First, it committed to easing
further access to care, including the
prior authorization dialogue we had
earlier. Second, expanding support
resources. So, additional clinical
resources and administrative resources
that are wrapped around individuals and
their families if they're in elevated
clinical challenging situations or
administratively challenging situations.
Third, more value, improving the out-of-
pocket costs for consumers at the
moments that matter, for example, at the
pharmacy counter. Fourth, additional
accountability recommended to our board
and our board implemented an elevation
of the waiting of customer and patient
satisfaction in the bonus program for
anybody in our company who's bonus
eligible. And then fifth, we um
committed to transparency. We said we
would issue annually a transparency
report to report on how we are doing
relative to those commitments in the
ensuing year. So later in the first
quarter this year, the first
transparency report will come out
relative to some of the actions.
>> David, as we wind down this
conversation, which I think really
illustrates how complex and complicated
dealing with the health care system is,
uh, lots of challenges. It sounds like
you have some optimism though that
things can get better. I guess I'd just
like to ask finally, what gives you hope
that positive change is coming?
>> So, um, I appreciate the opportunity to
end on this. Um, we're about to, as the
United States, celebrate our 250th
birthday anniversary. Our company is a
230-y old company. We're one of the
oldest companies that has been in
service um almost as long as this
country and it has gone through just
like the country many rebirths over
time. So, you look back to look forward.
You have two choices.
You could either start every day with
pessimism or optimism. I choose to start
every day with optimism. The road will
lead you to realism, but if you're
optimistic, you could bias it in a
certain way of positivity. And then
lastly, there are bright spots all over
the place. Unfortunately, our society
seeks not to talk about them. We seek to
talk only about the flat spots. And we
need to learn from the flat spots, but
we need to learn from the bright spots
as well. And the final note I would say
is I'm driven to help to make the US
healthcare system better for the next
generation.
>> David, thank you so much for joining us
today.
>> Thank you very much.
[music]